How fear and money run our lives?
A person who is worried about his future asked a wise man —
I am afraid of my future, I do not possess a lot of money, not much material security. How to overcome this fear?
The wise man said, “If you have none of these, then you do not have a future. What are you worried about? If you have no money, no wife, small house, very little material at your possession, then do you have a future?
Something that is carried forward from today to tomorrow is termed as future. You have so little to take forward. Those who have a lot, have to exist till tomorrow to protect what they have. They not only have stuff, but they also have worries related to that stuff. The one who has nothing has nothing to care about. Are you worrying by imitating others because it is considered fashionable to worry? In reality, you are free and blessed”.
FEAR FROM IMAGINATION
Image for post
Photo by Fernando @cferdo on Unsplash
A lot of our anxiety is due to imagination. And imagination requires stuff to fuel itself. You cannot imagine without anything at the centre. The things that can be lost to time are at the centre of our worries.
If you have less to be taken away, then what are your worries founded on? Take care of today. That is sufficient. Be grateful that no one has haggled you with an unnecessary burden.
Usually, people who have a lot are worried because what they have is clinging to them. But in reality, it is the opposite. The people who have a lot are attached to material things. If you have nothing, you are taking needless worry upon yourself. Learn to fly without a bother. That is the best way to live happily. There should not be anything to hold you.
WHAT DO YOU WANT TO BE?
Image for post
Photo by Mitchell Hollander on Unsplash
Here is a little extract from the famous story of Sermon on the Mount. One day, Jesus was walking with his bench. They passed by some beautiful lily flowers. Jesus paused. He turned to his disciples and said, “These flowers have more splendour than the king of Solomon kingdom. Do you know why they dance, smile and exuberate like this? Because they do not worry about tomorrow”.
“The king has to take care of so much. How can he rest in peace? The flowers stayed delighted in their little existence. The fact that they would not be there tomorrow does not matter to them. They are delicate.”
Do you want to be a rock that lasts through time? Not dancing, not smiling, not enjoying the little things in life. Or do you want to be a flower that lives for a short time and lives carelessly? The choice is up to you. How do you want to live?
CENTER OF IMAGINATION
Image for post
Photo by Belinda Fewings on Unsplash
When you do not have the material stuff to ground your imagination, what is the source of your worries? If I have material stuff, my fantasy would be built around that. If you have nothing, what are you worried about? Are you perplexed about the future of others?
It was declared that the kingdom is being attacked by a hostile army. Hearing the news, the beggar got a cardiac arrest. He said, “Now all my riches would be plundered away”. The beggar seemed to more worried than the king. Do the things that are intimidated by your thoughts really exist? Always ask this question.
ASK THE RIGHT QUESTIONS
Image for post
Photo by Tim Mossholder on Unsplash
If something cannot be threatened, it does not exist. Question the existence of those things which are in danger of slipping away into non-existence.
Do you want to lose your inner peace by considering foreign stuff as yours? Do you love temporary happiness and the long sorrow that comes with it?
You know it does not belong to you. You know it can be taken away. But still, you are getting attached to it. You are inviting trouble at your peril. If you want to enjoy the other side of things, you have to make a choice.
SPIRITUALITY
Image for post
Photo by Jared Rice on Unsplash
Spirituality is only for those who are fed up of their sorrows. If you are uncertain about your deplore, then you need to experience more grief. That is your punishment.
Spirituality begins when you say enough of it. I am not meant to be buffeted by waves of alternating pleasures and sorrows. One has to be fed up to achieve that state of mind.
If still a green corner exists in your mind; if you still have uncertainty whether you are living rightly or not, then you would not be able to go through the exact spiritual discipline that liberation demands. You will lose your way.
WHAT ARE WE STRIVING
Image for post
Photo by Sharon McCutcheon on Unsplash
We all yearn for food and education. The question is that do you eat the bread in front of you today or do you consume bread for a week in advance.
How much can you eat today? You require only as much as you eat today. If you have more food, you have to carry it along. It may get stale in future. Are we really looking basic material sustenance?
If that is the case, kindly go ahead and slog. Work as hard as possible. But ask yourself, are we really concerned about bread alone? The hunger and thirst are not in the stomach, they are in our minds. If you are dealing with genuine poverty where basic necessities are deprived of you, then fight for bread. But usually, that is not the real case.
THE BITTER TRUTH
Image for post
Photo by Saad Sharif on Unsplash
Man is starving mentally. Humans are the only species that are overweight and obese but still thinking about food. Are you deprived of basic needs? Ask yourself this question again. It is the mind that is not coming to rest.
We are psychologically at war with our neighbour. We want money not just to consume but to defend ourselves against the world psychologically. That defence is not needed in reality. We need money to secure ourselves. We do not need riches only for food.
Look at the kind of sums people accumulate. Is it just to eat and wear clothes and have a roof over the head?
I do not think so. It is to compensate for the lack of love and god in their lives. People want money because they do not have love. They need even more money because they do not have god. That is why the search for money is futile.
Every animal has to look for its daily meals. Humans also have to do it. But we are not looking only for food. We are looking for something else through money. But the fact is that the things you want cannot be achieved through money, so you keep demanding more and more money.
It is like wanting the sky and running very hard on earth. You can run as hard as possible, yet you will never reach the sky. More money will never give you that which you want through wealth.
THE MISSING OPPURTUNITIES
Image for post
Photo by Kat Yukawa on Unsplash
Mankind today is more prosperous than it has been ever in its history. I am not talking about developed countries. Except for a handful of places on the earth, nowhere is man starving.
Our wealth as an aggregate is only growing continuously. We were never as well-fed as we are today. We never had as much social security as we have today. The quantum of material a man has today, he never had it before.
WHAT TO DO —RISE OF CREATIVITY
You must love solace so much that even a slight departure towards stress should activate an inner alarm. All these fantasies that take you away from your natural charm, the moment they arise, you would be feeling restless. You feel distanced from your self.
The solution is to love ourselves a lot. Only then we disallow our support to our suffering. We support our adversity so much, how will anything else ever come to us.
Image for post
Photo by Jr Korpa on Unsplash
You can imagine things within a boundary — the stuff of the known. Your imagination can never go to the unknown possibilities of life. When you imagine, you think within the limitations of the known. Intuitions, dreams and, awareness are all based on what is already known to you.
Creativity is a leap into the unknown. If something is established on the known, it is not creativity. It is a mere reconfiguration which would not help in the long run. Creativity is something which springs up in you without a past.